[ Music ]
>> Lilou: Hello [inaudible]
Lilou here
in actually South
California, in San Diego
at the transformational
leadership council meeting here
with you, Dawson.
I'm really excited to
have this conversation
with you for Gaiam TV.
>> Dawson Church: It's
yup more fun, Lilou.
Thank you.
>> Lilou: So we're going to talk
about epigenetic
energy medicine.
Really, this new biology
call it of the intention.
You're the author of
the Genie in Your Genes?
>> Dawson Church: Yes.
Yes, that's mine.
>> Lilou: That's a hard
title to say [chuckles].
>> Dawson Church: [Chuckles]
the Genie in Your Genes, yeah.
>> Lilou: And we're not
talking of the jeans.
We're really talking
not the jeans.
You know, those blue jeans.
>> Dawson Church: Yes, right.
>> Lilou: Really.
Tell us about your story and how
you came across this energy work
and how actually
powerful it is for people.
>> Dawson Church: It was
like pieces of a puzzle.
And as I began to
look for more and more
of the pieces they are there.
So, I began with my
colleague saying,
well this energy work
is really feels good
for the patient,
good for the client.
But there's no real
science behind it.
So I began to it delve deep into
the science behind this kind
of healing and discovered
there are literally hundreds
and hundreds of studies
showing how people heal
if they just shift
their beliefs,
their energy their emotions.
So, I began to go on a
detective quest to try
and find all the
pieces of the puzzle.
And psychology had some, biology
had some, epigenetics had some
and energy psychology has
energy medicine had some.
And as I put all
those pieces together,
they fit into this amazing
tapestry that became the book,
the Genie in Your Genes.
So, it was like a
detective story.
But I found that
everywhere I looked
for evidence, it was there.
And it's powerful.
It's real.
It has a powerful effect on
healing and it's scientific.
>> Lilou: So where did you start
really in showing the evidence
that these type of
energy medicine work?
>> Dawson Church:
Well, I'll leap ahead.
Rather where I started
where I end it.
But my most recent
research was into cortisol.
Cortisol is your
main stress hormone.
So, if you're stressed,
you have lots
of adrenaline, lots of cortisol.
And your body makes that
cortisol and adrenaline
in in just a few seconds.
So, if I had been in a nice
relaxed state, your body is
in a normal unstressed state.
And then I tell you to
think a negative thought.
Think one negative thought.
Think about the fight
with the family member.
Think about the meeting at
work that didn't go so well.
One of those negative thoughts
can instantly trigger the
production of more
cortisol, more adrenaline.
What's happening there is
this thought, this idea,
this mental construct in
the front of your brain,
sends signal all
through your body.
So, first of all to your
mid brain and hind brain,
they then tell your body
you're under stress.
Your body can't tell the
difference between that thought
of stress and an object of
stress, like a real predator
or snake, a rabbit, dog.
It can't tell the difference.
There's this thought in your
mind about the office meeting.
So that signal travels
through your body
and suddenly you're flooded
with these stress hormones
like adrenaline and cortisol.
Big big rise.
So what's happening is that
thought is sending a signal
to the part of your endocrine
system that uses those hormones
and those genes turn on.
So as we think, literally,
thousands of genes are
are being turned on
and off throughout our body
producing enormous amounts
of [inaudible].
And so what I'm trying to point
out is the really high
usefulness of learning
to reduce that stress response.
If we release the stress
response, then you shift all
that hormonal shift and
your body will change
as though it happens.
Your neurology, your
brain wiring changes.
And just as you think
a negative thought
and all this bad stuff happens,
think a positive thought
and the reverse happens.
So, really, are an argument
to persuade people
think positively.
Love. Be kind.
Meditate. Do energy medicine.
Do all these things and they
are having powerful affects
in your body.
>> Lilou: And can you
measure that scientifically?
>> D.C: Absolutely.
We did one study
recently published
in a top tier medical journal.
And we had people we gave people
a form of therapy called EFT
or emotional freedom techniques.
So it tapping, so
called tapping.
Because it involves tapping on
acupuncture points in your body.
Tap to these points.
And we gave people an hour of
either talk therapy regular,
signature with a therapist
having a discussion, you know,
having to work with you.
Or an hour of EFT.
Or just rest.
We found that in the group
that got EFT, their depression
and anxiety symptoms
dropped in one hour by more
than double talk therapy.
So, by doing the tapping
on the acupuncture press
points had a huge effect
psychologically, but their level
of cortisol dropped
by 24 percent.
Your main stress hormone,
your main aging hormone
dropped 24 percent in an hour.
It was an amazing result.
In fact, the lab who
was doing the testing
as we're mailing our first
batch of tests, I was supposed
to present them to a
medical conference.
And I mailed all the tests
to the lab but I was hoping
to put the other test
[inaudible] conference.
And the lab didn't e
mail me back the results.
And I began to pest them,
saying, "Where are my results?
I'm doing this conference,
I need these results."
And a week went by.
Two weeks went by
and no results.
So, actually, I got really,
you know, upset at the lab.
My cortisol rising myself.
I told the lab, "What's
going on there?"
And they said, "Dr. Church,
your results are anomalous.
Cortisol does not drop this far.
We've done tens of
thousands of cortisol tests.
These results are impossible.
We've been recalibrating our
equipment, rerunning the tests
because cortisol
cannot drop that fast."
But it did.
I mean, much faster than any
kind of a normal response.
So as your anxiety
and depression drops,
your stress hormones,
like cortisol, drop.
And also your rejuvenation
hormones, like the HTA, rise.
And it's a powerful effect,
both for reducing stress
and promoting the
healthful exchange
of biochemical in your body.
>> Lilou: How do you because
during this what happens
actually during an energy
or healing or the tapping?
Because right now
you just said EFT.
But I'm sure there's other
first, what other type
of modalities are we
talking about here?
>> D.C: There are lots of them.
There are energy
medicine modalities.
There's also one called EMDR,
which is very effective
for PTSD.
EMDR and EFT works seem to
work very similarly in terms
of outcomes in the
people that get them.
And this whole big world
of energy medicine,
that there are many
different techniques.
I use EFT because
it's hard to do badly.
So, it's simple and fast.
>> Lilou: So you don't speak of
the reconnection or other things
that can go through
people's head
or [inaudible] or
things like that?
>> D.C: Only things that we
can measure scientifically.
And some of those we may be
able to measure in the future,
but until I see the research,
I just don't know, you know?
>> Lilou: And so the
intention from which
that the healing is
done has a huge impact
on the results, right?
Can you measure intention?
>> D.C: You can measure
intention,
and my friend [inaudible]
actually has done
that in terms of our results.
But, for example, with cortisol,
you can measure mental states.
So, if you have a
positive mental state,
you'll tend to have
a lower cortisol.
If you have a negative
mental state,
you'll raise the cortisol.
And so, anything we do that
intention just feeling good
in various ways will
help us physiologically.
It'll measure the effects of
the body of your thoughts.
>> Lilou: So what are some
of the chapters in this book?
>> D.C: Well
>> Lilou: To healing
and to epigenetics
>> D.C: Yeah.
Epigenetics is so
interesting because it shows
that as we have influences
from outside the cell
that this affects our gene
expression, the old model
of gene expression was that
all the informations are
in the genes.
That's where it comes from.
And that then terms
our biological fate.
We now know that that
is not at all true.
That what we think, what we
feel, are strong emotions.
Especially, if you
believe something strongly,
you have a strong emotion behind
it, you literally send signals
that shift your gene expression.
So, we now know that
stress especially,
plays a hugely important
role in gene expression.
And one of the favorite
ways of looking at this is,
is looking at twins,
identical twins.
And identical twins are
born with the same genome.
So they have two babies
born, identical twins
from the exactly the same genes.
Identical genes.
So you think they'd
have the same diseases,
they would die the same time.
And they don't.
One might get cancer,
one might not get cancer.
One might get heart disease.
One might not.
On average, according to
the [inaudible] institute,
they die ten years apart.
So, really different health
outcomes with the same genomes.
So, what's going on there?
Mostly stress environmental
stress.
But mental stress
plays a huge role.
And so our genes are
being powerfully affected
from outside the cell,
outside the body even,
by our stress levels.
>> Lilou: Tell us
about the DNA too.
Because we hear a
lot about that.
I don't know if you've
looked into this
but this supposedly junk
part of the DNA and its role
into us living this
really purposeful, fun,
[inaudible] life
without this less stress
and more in the flow.
>> D.C: Well, that whole idea
of junk DNA is really more
like junk science because
that was just a label
for what we didn't know.
So we thought we don't
know, we had the arrogance
to think we don't
know what it does,
therefore it has no function.
And so, science unfortunately is
full of that kind of arrogance.
And rather than the humility
at this amazingly complex
biological both in our bodies
and the world that we see.
So, it takes a while to figure
out what it all does,
but we eventually do.
But
Often we see things
happening in practice.
A long time before we know
how they work scientifically.
Like, [inaudible] for example
or these other kinds
of energy healing.
How do they work?
We don't know.
But they do work,
we can see that.
But, that's no excuse not
to investigate them or not
to use them if they
do work and a say.
For example, we didn't
know how aspirin worked
for a century, two centuries.
And we used it.
We didn't know [inaudible]
work prevent malaria.
I mean, so all through the
history of medicine and science,
we have all kinds
of technologies
that they work and we use them.
We only think about how
they work much later.
And energy medicine
is one of those.
So now [inaudible] oh,
inspecting cortisol.
So now we are starting to figure
out how it works in the body.
But we know that it
works for a long time.
>> Lilou: And the DNA?
Then what could it did you
look into that or have an idea
of which role it plays?
>> D.C: I think we'll gradually
figure out more and more
and more about how DNA works.
About how other parts
of the cell function
and [inaudible] works
on the DNA.
Like, we now know that certain
proteins trigger certain kinds
of DNA expression.
We know that especially RNA
we thought it was just kind
of a [inaudible] molecule.
Eventually, we thought that
RNA played a limited role
in gene expression.
Now, it turns out that RNA
can trigger the expression
of certain genes and even
help create certain proteins.
So our
>> Lilou: RNA stands for?
Sorry, I'm not familiar
with that term.
>> D.C: Ribonucleic acid, RNA.
The model is that
the DNA splits.
You know, the DNA
strand brakes apart.
And then RNA is an immediate
molecule that carries
that information to
another part of a cell.
And so, it's a temporary
molecule.
But now we've discovered,
this temporary molecule,
which we thought was
just a very lowly link
in the biological chain,
now is really important.
So with each layer
of understanding,
we realize the body is more
complex far more complex
than we believed.
As when you have a
certain thought, Lilou,
if you just have a for example.
Think about a pleasant
experience you had.
Having that memory that pleasant
experience is sending signals
all through your body to change
your biological processes.
Thinking about a bad experience
is doing the same thing.
As you flood your mind as it
becomes mindful for example,
do [inaudible] meditation,
do EFT.
Do all these things that
support your health.
You're having profound effects
on your most basic
levels of physiology.
>> Lilou: And does
it fix the RNA, too?
Do you get into that?
>> D.C: I don't in the book.
But what I do show in the book
is that if you take an MRI scan,
see the look at that MRI scan,
and it shows what's happening
in different regions
of the brain.
See all these brain regions
and see how they're lit up
or not lit up in an MRI.
What is also happening is
that there's all this magnetic
information being generated
outside of our bodies
in an MRI as well.
An MRI photograph, certainly
MRI's and vast MRI's,
showing the fields
outside of bodies.
They look they are full of
color, they're full of movement
as we think and feel and
experience and believe.
This whole beautiful
energy field outside
of our bodies is being
affected as well.
But for whatever reason, when we
do an MRI exam of the patient,
we simply clip all that away
and look only what
happens inside their skull.
We read the MRI inside
their skull
and discard all the information
about what's happening
in their field.
But the field is huge
and extends a lot more
than the human body and is full
of detailed information as well.
>> Lilou: What role
does it play there
in the energy work
then to have such a
>> D.C: For example, our
hearts fields, or the fields
of our biological heart, extends
about 50 feet away
from our bodies.
So, four meters I guess
away from our bodies.
So, as I'm sitting
with you here,
our heart's field
are retracting.
Our brain's fields
We're having not just a local
experience with each other
in what we can see
with each other,
we're having an invisible
energy field experience as well.
And that's affecting us.
When for example you speak
to another human being speak
to a friend your voice changes.
Your skin tone changes.
All kinds of physiological
things is changed
when you are interacting with
somebody you appreciate or love.
And so, our fields are
attracting in that way.
All our fields are retracting
all the time as we get closer
to each other our fields
exchange information.
So these fields are really
important and how to use them
for healing and not
just for reading them.
But also, how do you
affect those fields?
For example, one study
showed that if somebody
in a coherent mindful state
offers a healing medicine
treatment to another
human being,
that they actually entrain that
person's field to their field.
So a sick person maybe
with pain or headache,
their field is entrained
by the field of the healer.
Really remarkable stuff.
Another famous of its
studies is a 70's show
that when healers are
at a healing state
when they're actually
offering healing
for the people they synchronize
with the earth's predominant
frequency of so, what we do is
when we're in the
healing states,
when we're in certainly
deep sleep.
When we're in highly creative
states, our brains are
in this place where we sort of
communicate with each other.
And so, we're receiving
a transferring energy
from each other all the time
in these invisible ways.
>> Lilou: I really
like the EDMR and how
through the eye movements
it's kind
of can we say it's
close to hypnosis.
And to get to the
subconscious area?
>> D.C: Yeah.
Because in hypnosis and in
those kind of deep states,
are our brain waves slow down
to the two slowest waves,
which are theta and delta.
So, when we're in under hypnosis
when we're in deep sleep,
our brains are all
in theta and delta.
When we're in a state
of learning,
we are in theta and delta.
When we are healing,
we're in that state.
When we're in alpha,
and especially in beta,
the higher frequencies, we're
in the province of thought.
You're thinking.
Your conscious mind
is very very reactive.
Children at the age of
about six are primarily
in theta and delta.
They're in the super
learning state
because that was very
useful in [inaudible] terms.
We're absorbing all
such information
from the outside world.
So, kids 0 to 6 are
essentially in theta
and delta absorbing all this
material about how to survive.
How do you fit with
the norms of the tribe?
How do you please your parents?
How do you find food?
All of these skills
are being taught then
when they're in this state.
Later on we develop alpha
and then more and more beta.
Then we start to think
and have this relation.
But at early stages,
we don't have that.
And also when we're sort of
in this highly creative state
or learning state or under
hypnosis, we also have are just
in theta and delta, those
two slow brain waves.
So, this is sort of showing us
that we are beings of energy.
And that as we shift our
beliefs, our thoughts,
are intentions that all of
these things are shifting along
with it as well.
>> Lilou: You must
love [inaudible].
I'm sure you had many
conversations with him.
>> D.C: Last week.
>> Lilou: [Chuckles] I love him.
>> D.C: Yes.
He's amazing.
Yeah, yeah.
>> Lilou: So, how is
your work different
or what piece do you bring in?
And what kind of conversation
do you have when you two talk?
[Chuckles]
>> D.C: Yeah.
We have very interesting talks.
And Bruce, really, in his
books, paints a graphic picture
of the role of energy
and healing.
And what my focus is,
I want to get this
into mainstream medicine.
I love seeing it in
individual therapy practices
and in clinics.
I want to see it in hospitals.
Like, for example,
one doctor I met
at a conference a few years
back said to me, "I learned EFT
at last year's conference.
Now, it's part of our intake
at our medical clinic."
They come in patients come
in they get a long
intake interview.
They do EFT with patients.
What they find is that their
levels of pain often go down.
Certainly anxiety and
depression go down.
And then they treat the
real medical problem rather
than the overlay of the problem.
One patient, for example, I
worked with demonstration.
He had a broken leg.
So, the guy volunteered to work
with me on stage if in front
of a whole bunch of people.
And he had a recent
fracture of his left leg.
He was on crutches.
And I thought to myself,
how could this be emotional?
How could this be anything to do
with how can energy
healing possibly help them?
It's just a bone fracture.
It's two weeks old.
Of course, he's in pain.
So, I asked him on a scale of
0 to 10 how big his pain was,
and it was an eight
out of a ten.
So, a lot of pain.
Recent bone fracture.
And the skeptical
part of me said,
"I don't think energy
medicine can help him."
But in EFT on him and
his level of pain went
from an eight to a two.
>> Lilou: What was the EFT on?
>> D.C: EFT well
>> Lilou: What was it on?
What was the sentence?
>> D.C: What it was on was
on all the emotional
factors around the fracture.
For example, he got the bone
fracture driving his car.
And his wife wanted him
to go to this event.
He didn't want to go.
He felt forced to go.
He felt coerced to go to
the event by his wife.
So, guess what?
He had an accident and
didn't get to the event.
He was resentful
toward his wife.
He was angry at the
other drivers.
He was angry with the doctor.
He felt the hospital
hadn't performed well.
So all these layers
are resentment,
anger, blame and so on.
These are all emotional.
Once we tackled those
away, he was onto a two.
That's the real physical pain
that the overt pain
initially was innate.
So, six points of that eight
was emotional factors anger,
are blame, criticism,
self-blame.
He was blaming himself
for having been coerced
into doing something
he didn't want to do.
So, he probably been had
the habit his whole life
of doing things for
these other people.
You know? And shorting
his own needs.
So, all of these things
are emotional and they show
up in our body as
physical pain, as diseases.
But they're hugely
linked to our emotions.
And when you work
with energy medicine
on the emotional aspects,
the physical aspects
don't necessarily go away,
but then they're shrugged to
what they really are rather
than being compounded by the
overlay of emotional stress.
>> Lilou: So, did that
just was that subconscious?
All of this was happening
on the subconscious level?
>> D.C: Yes.
And consciously, he just felt
an eight out of a ten pain.
That was his conscious.
He didn't know it was
going on but as I probed,
as I tapped with him,
as he released all the emotional
stuff suddenly, ah you know?
Yeah, yeah.
>> Lilou: I feel that a lot of
people doing EFT, but they kind
of I mean, a big thing seems
to be actually giving a
diagnosis too and knowing how
to head back knowing and
peel all those layers.
It's not something maybe people
are tapping away some things
that don't really
need tapping, maybe?
Are we going the right track
when we do that by our own
or it's just harmless?
>> D.C: It's harmless,
but it does help
if you're working seriously on
the issue to find those things.
What are the patterns there?
Like, for example,
his pattern of giving
into his wife's demands
echoed him giving
into his mother's demands.
And it does take some skill
to find those layers
and tap on them.
But if you don't do that,
Lilou, think if you just carry
that load of suffering
throughout your whole life?
Making yourself sick,
being in pain.
The penalty for not
doing it, you know?
The penalty for not releasing
the emotion is carrying
that stress forward
and aging your body.
So, cortisol is our
main aging hormone.
We age faster if we
have lots of cortisol.
And so, if that person didn't
address those emotional aspects
of his pain and carried
those old early experiences
through to the present,
day by day.
And these of relationships that
is putting a burden of stress
on his body that
needn't be there.
>> Lilou: Most people don't
see those events happening
in their life as linked
to some of that, huh?
Because it's a big conversation.
It seems to be, those people
that try to use that old way
of those medicines, or
the traditional way.
And you're not pushing
that away.
You're just saying and if
there was another solution.
>> D.C: Oh, by all means.
Because one of the things I've
written about in the past is how
to work with both your
conventional medical doctor
and therapist and
psychiatrist, medication and so
on an alternative medicine.
You do those well, you get the
best of both possible worlds.
You treat those things
emotionally and spiritually.
There are spiritual emotions.
And those things that are
medical, that are medical.
So, you need the best of
all those, those worlds.
Not just, you know.
Whenever you hear somebody
say, my method is fantastic
and it replaces all others.
You know there's
something wrong there.
Because you need all these
different forms of healing.
They're all appropriate.
If, for example, it
might work with veterans,
I've now done lots of work with
thousands of people with PTSD.
And analyzed the data,
done treatments with them.
And
>> Lilou: Can you give as ideas
of post traumatic syndromes?
>> D.C: Stress disorder, yes.
Yeah. There are about 479,000
Vietnam veterans with PTSD
in the U.S. and over
half a million
from Afghanistan
and Iraq with PTSD.
And over time they have
higher rates of suicide.
A veteran commits suicide
roughly every 90 minutes.
So we have about 8,000
veterans suicides a year
in the U.S. huge numbers
of U.S. veterans suicides.
Very high level anxiety,
depression
and physical problems.
The very high utilizers
of medical services
because they are they're sick.
You know? They get
sick after a while.
PTSD isn't just a
psychological problem.
It shows on their bodies
in all kind of ways.
And we found through
EFT, six [inaudible]
of EFT with these veterans.
Six sessions produces
them dropping below
that PTSD baseline.
So they no longer test positive
PTSD after those six sessions.
And we find it works
for roughly 86 percent
of those the veterans.
So, six sessions and they
woke up and they're gone.
So, we've done this with
lots and lots of people.
Now imagine what these veterans
were carrying that burden
with them throughout
their lives.
They would suffer terribly.
And our strong motivation
is to prevent
and shift that suffering.
>> Lilou: So I know that you're
a transformational leader.
So you're really bringing
this into the hospitals.
>> D.C: Yes.
>> Lilou: Is there a
methodology to do that?
Are you moving forward?
Are the America doctors open
to these kind of practices?
>> D.C: I lectured at
many medical conferences.
And what I say is, we need
to treat emotional issues
and spiritual issues with
spiritual and emotional means
and medical issues
with medical means.
And you'll see a whole room full
of doctors nodding their heads.
Doctors know very well that many
of their patient's
problems are emotional
and are spiritual
and are not medical.
Not at the material level.
And so they really, I found, are
supportive of proper medication,
proper medical attention.
But then also, teaching
patient's stress relief,
for example.
Simple forms of stress relief.
Like, mindfulness.
Like, heart methods.
Like, EFT.
So, the health care
worker study we did,
it was 216 psychotherapists,
doctors, nurses, chiropractors,
alternative medicine workers
at five medical conferences,
who got one day, EFT intensive.
And their levels of anxiety
and depression dropped
by an average of 45 percent.
So, a 45 percent drop in mental
health problems in just one day.
Really really powerful effect.
Also, their physical
pain dropped
by an average of 68 percent.
So, two thirds dropped
in physical pain.
Not working on their
physical pain but working
on their emotional issues.
On their sense of burnout, their
sensuality, their conflicts
with superiors, are their
difficulties balancing their
personal and their
professional lives.
All of those professional
factors were really a
contributor to their
physical pain.
We also looked at the
level of cravings,
with things like chocolate.
You know, cigarettes.
You know, tobacco, alcohol.
All those things.
And their cravings dropped
an amazing 83 percent
after about a half hour of EFT.
Because, again, tons of
craving is emotional.
It's not physical.
We think we crave the chocolate,
but what we really
crave is the love.
You know? So we go we
feel we miss the love
or we're board or we're lonely.
We go eat the chocolate.
But it's not the chocolate.
It's the love we're missing.
So
>> Lilou: Sometimes
it's the chocolate.
Like right now.
>> D.C: [Chuckles].
>> Lilou: Maybe not
getting a lot of love?
>> D.C: You're getting you
want chocolate right now?
Well, I'd go into it.
I could tap with you on that.
I could [chuckles].
>> Lilou: No, it's
not a big craving.
It's just because
I love chocolate.
So, yes, I do have those little.
It's not the chocolate.
I would have those sugar
or those wanting to eat.
Yeah, I can totally
relate to that one.
>> D.C: Yeah.
And a lot
>> Lilou: So just
tap it in major.
>> D.C: I'll give
you an example.
I worked with somebody
just last week and I was
on a big group conference call.
And she said, "I have a
craving for this one kind
of dessert called
chocolate cream pie."
She also said, "I've worked
on all my cravings,
all my addictions.
They've all gone away
except for this one craving
for chocolate cream pie."
So I said to her, "Well,
when was the last time you
wanted a chocolate cream pie?"
She said, "I ate one tonight
before the coaching call."
Now, this is a weight
loss coaching call, okay?
So there she is,
we're tapping on this.
We're doing an EFT on this.
And she couldn't figure out why
in the world she had craved
this one kind of treat.
But nothing else.
She'd worked herself.
She's done EFT.
She's done all these
other things.
Dropped all of her
other cravings except
for this one craving.
So, we worked through
it a little bit.
And I asked her to
remember events
in her life where she had pie.
And she said, "Well, my parents
had pie after every meal.
Our family had pie every day."
And so I thought, well,
what's one example of an event
when you remember clearly
having a particular kind of pie.
And she said, "Well, I remember
when I was 10 or 11 years old,
we went to see my brother, who
is in a mental institution.
He was retarded and it
was a really sad day
because this is my brother.
And afterwards we all
went out to dinner
and had chocolate
cream pie together."
So, what they didn't do
as a family is they
didn't discuss the fact
that this little boy
was in an institution.
He couldn't speak.
She said, "I sat with him.
I sat next to him.
I felt the connection
with him emotionally.
But he couldn't speak.
So I couldn't talk to him.
So, she has all this sadness.
All this really sense of loss.
Then they got to
dinner with the parents.
The parents don't
talk about the visit.
They don't talk about
all the emotions
that have been stirred up.
They don't talk about
their feelings of grief.
That sounds retarded.
They don't talk about the
sense of loss they feel.
They don't help their
daughter process her feelings.
All they do is shovel pie in
their it's called your pie hole.
You know? You just
put pie in your mouth.
And so, all these years she's
been carrying this sense
of loss and grief.
So we've tapped on
the loss and grief.
And her craving for chocolate
cream pie she had a wrapper
right there with her on
the phone went down to 0.
Just dropped way down.
In fact, after EFT
[inaudible] after EFT workshops,
we discard often, just
hundreds of candies.
People just throw
the candies away.
They don't want them anymore.
They were craving them so much
before they did the tapping.
And then they go waste.
This is an example of how
much of our suffering,
much of our emotional suffering,
our cravings, our urges.
They are not.
We think they're
physical, they're not.
Their roots are emotional.
>> Lilou: So, it's
like they disappear.
They're gone.
They're released.
>> D.C: Yes.
We have people measure them.
And so we say, "Well,
how big is your pain now?
How big is your craving?"
They tell us.
We measure before and
after how big it is.
>> Lilou: And I had
one other question.
Because I had the conversation
with Doctor Buckins.
You probably know
him back in Chicago.
Buckins on EMGR?
He also works with
veterans, strangely enough.
I mean, this is not
I find it interesting
to meet all the different
people all
around the world having
same conversation.
And helping and supporting and
yet using different
kinds of methodology.
Because this is a huge problem,
the veteran area aspect.
And I get that.
And yet most of us
don't have this kind
of traumatic experience,
yet we have in us
something that we carry.
Like it could be
a rape, I guess.
Or it could be a car accident
where we saw our brother
die in front of us.
Or it could be a
divorce or whatever.
It could be tiny, but it
could affect our whole life.
And affect so you're
saying basically,
this is something you can
release and it has nothing
to do with your genes?
What is this gene?
Where is this genie located?
>> D.C: The most severely
impacted populations we've
worked with in our
nonprofit are people
who are the victims
of massive disasters.
Like, we've done several studies
in Rwanda with genocide orphans.
They live through the genocide
there and they have some PTSD.
We also have a team of
volunteers right now in Haiti,
working with people who survived
the Haiti earthquake in 2010.
So, those are extreme examples.
But, you don't have to have
been an earthquake or live
in a third world country or have
gone through a war to have PTSD.
Many children in regular
families have experiences
that profoundly affect them and
that have a big emotional impact
on them for the rest
of their lives.
That might just be
mom and dad yelling.
It it might be a
parent's absence.
They feel a sense of
abandonment by other people.
And so, all their lives they're
looking to of this need filled.
They feel this, they
want to be loved.
They want to find somebody.
They want to find their
perfect soul mate.
They want to find
the perfect job.
All these longings and cravings.
And often they're laid
out in early childhood
because of things we lost
and didn't have back then.
So it's not just the traumatic
examples that lead to PTSD,
often people have all kinds
of unfinished business
from their childhood.
They haven't resolved
these things.
And so, that girl who was that
little girl who had experience
with her brother and now she's
craving chocolate cream pie,
why?
Because now at 45, she
feels that's her connection
with her brother.
So she's 45 now.
She's overweight
struggling with her weight.
How does she deal with it?
It's all emotional based
on childhood experiences.
It's amazing how much
of our suffering is rooted
early in our childhood.
So, with these sorts of
therapies, we go in there,
like EMDR's, is a good example.
EMDR and EFT, both are
really effective for PTSD.
And we go in there and
we find those experiences
and we lighten the load.
We help people tap or
move through those.
And then as you shed layer after
layer after layer after layer,
suddenly all those signals
your genes have been getting
to make adrenaline, make
cortisol, those signals go away.
And then, so you
got the signal love.
Ah I'm relaxed.
Life is good.
There's a place for
me in the universe.
I don't have to carry this
heavy emotional burden anymore.
Then, those genes that code
for really health
promoting neurotransmitters,
like serotonin, you know,
[inaudible] a little bit
of cortisol but lots
of lots of the HTA.
All of our health
promoting hormones are turned
on by those signals.
So as you change your mind.
As you change your heart.
As you release that suffering,
it has deep, long lasting,
profound effects on your body,
as a signal is being
sent from your brain.
Your thoughts, your
emotions to your body shift.
Tapping and releasing those
early childhood traumas can
dramatic effect the course
of your future health.
>> Lilou: If our body wants to
it can naturally heal those?
>> D.C: Naturally heal, yes.
>> Lilou: Beautiful.
Thank you so much for
this awesome conversation.
>> D.C: It's been
a real pleasure.
Thanks, Lilou.
>> Lilou: Big, big kisses to all
[inaudible] creators out there.
Thank you.
I hope you have enjoyed
this interview.
And the Genies in
Our Genes, right?
>> D.C: The Genie
is in Your Genes.
>> Lilou: Your genes.
Big, big kisses.
Much love.
Bye bye.
[ Music ]